Vijayalakshmi Ayyavu

Engineering Leader | Cloud Engineering | Product Development | AI & Cloud Transformation | GenAI | Platform Engineering | LLM |PMP

Mobile – 9945454760
Email – avlakshmi@hotmail.com
Location – Bangalore
Social - https://www.linkedin.com/in/vijayalakshmi-ayyavu
Git - https://github.com/avlakshmi, https://github.com/vijayalakshmiayyavu
Portfolio - https://github.com/vijayalakshmiayyavu/My-Portfolio 
Professional Summary
AI Engineering Leader with 30+ years of experience leading global engineering organizations delivering enterprise-scale platforms across Healthcare, Telecom, Insurance and Logistics. Proven expertise in building AI-enabled products, GenAI solutions, cloud-native platforms, distributed systems, engineering management, Agile delivery, stakeholder management and product engineering. 
Experienced in engineering leadership, GenAI, LLMs, N8N, RAG, OpenAI, APIs, Agentic AI, Prompt Engineering, Machine Learning and cloud technologies including Azure, GCP and AWS. Experienced in leading cross-functional teams driving digital transformation, platform modernization and AI adoption. 
Managed delivery of 9+ concurrent enterprise projects with teams of 100+ engineers delivering 95% on-time releases. Led executive stakeholder engagements across Optus, AT&T and Singtel, managing multi-million-dollar enterprise transformation initiatives.
Work Summary 
•	Subex, Associate Director Engineering, Dec 2021   Jul 2023   1 yr 7 months
•	Visionet, Governance Manager, Nov 2020   May 2021   7 months
•	Unisys, Associate Engineering Manager, Feb 2014   June 2020   6 yrs 4 months
•	Cognizant Technologies, Manager Projects, Nov 2004   Mar 2010   5 yrs 4 months
•	Xansa, Project Lead, June 2004   Oct 2004   5 months
•	HCL Technologies, Project Lead, Mar 1997   May 2004   7 yrs 2 months
•	ITI Limited, Assistant Manager, Jan-1990 - Mar-1997 - 7 yrs 2 months
Leadership Highlights
✔ 30 years engineering leadership
✔ Managed global distributed Engineering Teams and involved in Engineering hiring
✔ Led cloud modernization and Agile transformation
✔ Product roadmap planning, Partner with product managers & Delivered Products
✔ Mentor Engineers, manage technical discussions and Executive stakeholders’ approvals 
✔ AI adoption initiatives, work with modern AI frameworks and Deliver AI products
✔ Build scalable engineering organizations and continuous learning
Core Skills
Gen AI, OpenAI, Agentic AI, RAG, N8N, LLM, Prompt Engineering, ML, DL
Python, JavaScript, ,COBOL, Natural, PL/SQL
Azure, AWS, GCP, Docker, Kubernetes, ArgoCD, GitLab CI/CD
PostgreSQL, MongoDB, Oracle, DB2
Experience Highlights
- Associate Director Engineering, Subex (2021-2023): Led enterprise cloud platform deliveries for Optus, AT&T and Singtel, managed cross-functional engineering teams, cloud migration and stakeholder management.
- Associate Engineering Manager, Unisys (2014-2020): Delivered logistics platform Unisys Next Gen Logistics modernization, Java migration, Agile releases and product roadmap execution.
- Earlier leadership roles at Cognizant for Elsevier, D&B and UHG, HCL Technologies and ITI with healthcare, insurance and enterprise modernization programs.
AI Projects
•	Built GenAI-powered enterprise assistants using OpenAI APIs
•	Developed RAG-based knowledge retrieval applications
•	Built AI web applications, N8N workflows
•	Developed AI-powered business analytics dashboards using PowerBI
•	Built AI-powered automation solutions
•	Created AI-based data analysis pipelines
Education & Certifications
B.E. Electronics & Communication
PMP Certified
Generative AI and AI Engineer Certification

WORK EXPERIENCE AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Dec 2021 to Jul 2023
Company - Subex
Role - Associate Director Engineering 
Project - End-to-End Network Asset Lifecycle Management Portal Development
Skills: Java, Rest API, Microservices, Postgres, Kubernetes, Docker, CI/CD, Argo CD, Git Lab, GCP, VMware, Azure, MS Project, RPA

Responsibility - Manage stakeholders expectations by working closely with various teams and clients. Manage multiple projects from Optus, ATT, and Singtel. Lead RFP responses, POCs, organization initiatives, program reviews and quality management. Manage data gathering, design workshops. Prepare interface documents for design governance reviews. Continuously improve process and closely track and monitor daily, weekly, monthly and yearly metrics for projects. Manage migration of Asset Management solution from Hadoop based on-premises environment to cloud enabled Hyper Sense (HS) Platform for Optus and Singtel on Google Cloud Infrastructure. HS is Subex flagship cloud platform through its data management, business modelling, data science, business intelligence and case management studios and speeds up development activities through configurations and settings.
Working closely with diverse set of stakeholders to ensure support and play a catalyst role in change management ensuring projects delivery progress by careful RACI analysis and resolutions. Ability to organize and prioritize work, work independently and within ambiguity produce deliverables, establish realistic goals and manage changing priorities. Lead teams and manage customer interactions as single point of contact for projects delivery. Resource performance and team development building successful teams. Revenue and invoice tracking. Resource assignments as per efforts estimated phase wise.

Accomplishments
* Successfully delivered Asset Lifecycle Management on HS platform for Optus.
* Successfully delivered Warehouse Management on HS platform for Singtel.
* Responsible for successful delivery of Discovery Integration Management on HS Platform for ATT.

Nov 2020 to May 2021
Company - Visionet Solutions Pvt Ltd
Role - Governance Manager 
Responsibility - Lead cross-functional teams composed of directors/sr. directors from wide ranging functional areas. Define the KRA for the team and drive the team to achieve revenue targets. Build strategy to achieve organization revenue targets and closely monitor revenue KPIs.
Work closely with senior management on strategy, organization initiatives, program reviews and quality management. Continuously improve process and closely track and monitor daily, weekly, monthly and yearly metrics.
Perform end-to-end program management. Experience is interacting with Directors and higher for planning, budgeting, and strategic discussions. Good exposure in continuous improvement principles and techniques and experience in managing cross functional teams with strong analytic and problem-solving skills.
Working closely with diverse set of internal contributors to ensure support and play a catalyst role in change management. Ability to organize and prioritize work, work independently and within ambiguity produce deliverables, establish realistic goals and manage changing priorities

Feb 2014 to June 2020
Company - Unisys
Role - Associate Engineering Manager, 
Project - Digistics -  End-to-End Logistics Management Portal 
Skills: Mainframe, FORTRAN, Oracle, Java, Cloud, MS Project, JIRA, O365, SharePoint, REST API, node, React, GraphQL, SOAP, SOAPUI, Swagger, WSDL, HTML, CSS, XML
Responsibility - Responsible for delivery of multiple concurrent projects, end-to-end projects delivery from initiation, execution, operations till production coordinating efforts of various teams to ensure projects are delivered on time. Lead customer communications and external stakeholder s interactions as needed for the project. Seek necessary project budget, resource capacity planning and forecasting.
Update Product backlog. Drive monthly release plan, implement Client Change Requests aligning with Logistics product road map and Production load cycle ( 4 to 5 enhancements monthly and 170 to 180 product enhancements yearly. Tracking 30 projects in-progress at different stages).
Report the projects status to the management by closely working with relevant stake holders (project teams, Client Executives, Product Owners and subject matter experts). Establish work plan/resource plan, scheduling projects in releases, continuously improve process ensuring IT investments and initiatives are aligned with business strategy and priorities.
SLAs reporting and Weekly and Monthly product backlogs tracking (reduced product backlogs to 50%). Participate in Sprint planning, daily stand-ups, retrospections as Scrum Master. Update sprint backlogs. Organize and participate in architecture, design and code reviews and demos. Define EPICs/User Stories in Jira, Track Financials for all customer enhancement projects CAPEX/OPEX. Identify and resolve technical challenges, issues/road blocks and evaluate projects/programs progress effectiveness and continuously improve process. Recruit, develop, and mentor teams. 
Accomplishments - Migrate the product from legacy (FORTRAN) to Java that caters to end-to-end Cargo logistics management. Manage the enhancements implementations on the legacy side and at the same time act as interface for the migration project in providing all the requirements needed for the team. Involved in-depth analysis of projects and their requirements developed earlier in the product and how those should be replicated in the new platform. Involved in extended discussions with product owners to meet new age business requirements. Adopted agile in two weeks iterations where product owners are continuously involved throughout the development process with intermittent demos.

Nov 2004 to Mar 2010
Company - Cognizant Technologies
Role - Manager Projects, 
Clients Projects 
Elsevier: Scientific Health Knowledge Management Portal
Client - Dun & Bradstreet: Information Management Portal
United Health Group: Consolidated Eligibility System

Skills: Java, Web Services, RESTFUL API, HTML, CSS, XML

Responsibility - End-to-end projects delivery execution and operations. Establish work plan, scheduling projects and reviewing work assignments and tracking status with teams. Identify and resolve issues/road blocks and evaluate projects/programs effectiveness. Review reports and modify schedules/plans as required from different projects. 
Reviewing requirements, Defining test plans, participating in design and test plan reviews, Involve in coding and testing activities. Involving in RFP process and reviewing and preparing the RFP response document, review Solution, Architecture design suggestions, validate estimate and pricing. Develop WBS, track work plan, backlog grooming and continuously improve process and productivity to build high performance scalable products solving customer s business challenge. Reviewing and defining process compliance and coordinating quality audits for the projects. Recruit, nurture, and mentor teams. Defining KRA for teams to evaluate performance and involving in hiring activities.
Accomplishments - Been part of a RFP for a major client who manages scientific information for healthcare professionals. RFC Process took eight months and involved rigorous reviews at various levels with Client. Was a key member of the strategy team that included experts from various technology areas required for the RFP. RFP won that required setting up an ODC for the client with a team size of 100+ associates. It was a major strategic win for Cognizant. As a member of four-member core team we set up the ODC for the client completed knowledge transition successfully with smooth steady state. 
Defined the requirements for the SLA portal as per the clients engagement agreement defines in the MSA. Client was very specific about the SLAs mentioned in the RFP to be reported monthly and as a result monthly metrics were captured right from knowledge transition phase and reported in the SLA portal. Earlier metrics was reported in word format and later SLA portal was built to show case performance against various metrics. This helped in building confidence with the client. 

Mar 1997 to May 2004
Company - HCL Technologies
Role - Project Lead
Clients Projects
American General: North Central Life Migration

Skills: Mainframe, COBOL, VSAM, ENDEVOR, FILEAID, ADABAS/Natural, SAS, ORACLE/VB, PL/SQL
Responsibility - Scheduling and reviewing work assignments and tracking status with teams. Participate and report status in monthly project review meetings. Ensure right code version gets merged in the QA ENV. Reviewing requirements, participating in design and test plan reviews, Involve in coding and testing activities in Mainframe technologies. Defining test plans. Involve in recruitment process for the organization. Set up knowledge and SLA tracking process for the account and projects. Good exposure in L1/L2/L3 incident management and metrics monitoring process.
Reviewing and defining process compliance and coordinating quality audits for the projects. Recruit, nurture, and mentor teams. Participate in RFPs, develop RFP responses, prepare approach documentation, review Solution, Architecture design suggestions, and validate estimate and pricing. Design Oracle data base model based on the Adabas data model. Identify functions, procedures and methods to be defined in PL/SQL for missing in-built equivalents for Natural functions and procedures. Document the requirements for the automation tool to convert the Natural programs to PL/SQL code. Involved in testing, verification of the automation tool and ensured team understood and used it correctly that speeded up the migration project. 
Accomplishments - Been part of a RFP for a major client to migrate 12 applications written on Adabas/Natural to Oracle/PL/Sql. I was the key member to develop the RFP response document in explaining how the Natural language will be re-written. 
The response document explained properties of Adabas/Natural and how it will be fit on to the new platform. The RFP response document was a key deliverable from HCL to help win the project. We set up a 50+ associate s team for the migration work. Resolve all the technical challenges and issues in migrating data from Adabas to Oracle. Functions and procedures created in Pl/Sql to match the functions supported by Natural.
